KubeOne: documentation for Operating System Manager (#1133)
kubermatic/docs: content/kubeone/master/architecture/operating-system-manager/usage/_index.en.md

Starting with KubeOne 1.5, OSM will be enabled by default for new and existing clusters. This change will be applied to existing clusters when they upgrade to 1.5.

To fallback to legacy user-data from Machine Controller, we can disable OSM for a KubeOne cluster. Although this is not recommended for production environments.

```yaml
apiVersion: kubeone.k8c.io/v1beta2
kind: KubeOneCluster
versions:
  kubernetes: 1.23.6
addons:
  enable: true
operatingSystemManager:
  deploy: false
```

## Migrating existing machine deployments

{{% notice warning %}}
Existing Machine Deployments will not be rotated automatically. Existing machine deployment
should be rotated manually, for them to consume configurations generated by OSM.
{{% /notice %}}

To perform this rotation please follow the guide at [Rolling Restart MachineDeploments][rolling-restart].

[rolling-restart]: {{< ref "../../../cheat-sheets/rollout-machinedeployment" >}}

## Using custom OperatingSystemProfile

The annotation `k8c.io/operating-system-profile` is used at the Machine Deployment level to select the Operating System Profile that will be used to generate configurations for provisioning the machines.

> ### When creating a new cluster

Author: Does machine controller work with bare metal setups? 

> Usually the Kubermatic machine-controller would take care of managing the worker nodes. However, without a provider we can not make use of it. For the following steps, we assume that the required infrastructure is in place and SSH access is ensured.

According to [this](https://docs.kubermatic.com/kubeone/v1.4/tutorials/creating_clusters_baremetal/) doc, it doesn't.

> ### When creating a new cluster

Reviewer: What I thought about is following the document you linked on cloud providers while still using machine-controller. In other words, just opt out from Terraform. I think it's okay as it is right now.

For new clusters, a dedicated terraform variable `initial_machinedeployment_operating_system_profile` was introduced for this purpose. It'll propagate the specified value to the initial machine deployments in the cluster.

It can be used as follows:

> 1. Create a custom OSP and place it in a folder inside your custom addons path, if it exists, otherwise create one. Let's take this minimalistic OSP as an example:

Author: That's irrelevant in the scope of KubeOne. We might cover that in the shared docs for OSM.

  version: "v1.0.0"
  supportedCloudProviders:
    - name: "aws"
  bootstrapConfig:
    files:
      - path: /opt/bin/bootstrap
        permissions: 755
        content:
          inline:
            encoding: b64
            data: |
              #!/bin/bash

              apt update && apt install -y curl jq

      - path: /etc/systemd/system/bootstrap.service
        permissions: 644
        content:
          inline:
            encoding: b64
            data: |
              [Install]
              WantedBy=multi-user.target

              [Unit]
              Requires=network-online.target
              After=network-online.target
              [Service]
              Type=oneshot
              RemainAfterExit=true
              ExecStart=/opt/bin/bootstrap

    modules:
      runcmd:
        - systemctl restart bootstrap.service

  provisioningConfig:
    files:
      - path: /opt/hello-world
        permissions: 644
        content:
          inline:
            encoding: b64
            data: echo "hello world"
```

**NOTE:** This is just for demonstration purposes and the custom OSPs would most likely be more complicated than this.

2. Create your infrastructure

```bash

> terraform apply -var=initial_machinedeployment_operating_system_profile=osp-install-curl

Reviewer: You should probably put this in `terraform.tfvars` instead.

Author: For demonstration purpose, I don't see any issue with this but sure.

```

3. Now create your cluster and make sure that you are using the custom addons folder.

```yaml
apiVersion: kubeone.k8c.io/v1beta2
kind: KubeOneCluster
versions:
  kubernetes: "1.22.5"
cloudProvider:
  aws: {}
addons:
  enable: true
  path: "./custom-addons"
```

> **NOTE:** The path for addons can be anything. But make sure that the custom OSP exists in that directory.

Author: > Create a custom OSP and place it in a folder inside your custom addons path, if it exists, otherwise create one

> We should use notice blocks instead of **NOTE:**
Well tbh, they add a lot of noise and in this case they are not worth the visual noise.

> ### For an existing machine deployments

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### For an existing cluster
```

For existing Machine Deployments; edit the machine deployment and update `k8c.io/operating-system-profile` annotation with the required OSP name.

{{% notice warning %}}

> Secrets and OSC against the Machine Deployment will be rotated right away when we update the annotation. But the existing Machine Deployments will not be rotated automatically.

Author: This is actually correct for existing clusters. MD will be reconciled in OSM only when it has this particular annotation. I'll rephrase it a bit.

> Existing machine deployment should be rotated manually, for them to consume configurations generated by OSM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Existing MachineDeployments should be rotated manually for them to consume configurations generated by OSM.
```

{{% /notice %}}

To perform this rotation for existing Machine Deployments please follow the guide at [Rolling Restart MachineDeploments][rolling-restart].

[rolling-restart]: {{< ref "../../../cheat-sheets/rollout-machinedeployment" >}}

### For new machine deployments

> Create a new Machine Deployment and make sure that you add the `k8c.io/operating-system-profile` annotation with the required OSP name.

Reviewer: This should be before `For existing MachineDeployments`.
